## Learning intentions

You will learn:

- what object-oriented programming (OOP) is
- what an objects and class mean in standard OOP
- how to create a class and instantiate an object in Python

### Success criteria

You will know that you have completed the learning when:

- You can answer the quiz at the bottom of the page
- You have completed the 13DTM Intro to OOP assignment on Github Classroom

# Introduction to object-oriented programming

In year 13, you will be expected to use object-oriented programming techniques as part of the computer program standard.

## What is object-oriented programming?

> Object-oriented programming (OOP) is a way of writing computer programs using "objects" to stand for **data and methods**. Computer programs that are not object-oriented are a list of instructions for the computer, telling it to do certain things in a certain way, which is called procedural programming. However, in object-oriented programming, computer programs use objects that talk to one another to change the data in those objects […]  Because of the way object-oriented programming is designed, it helps the developer by allowing for code to be easily reused by other parts of the program or even by other people.[^1]

As stated by the definition above, object-oriented programming is another way to write programs. So far, you've written programs as a series of steps one after the other — variables get declared, some code might update the values, and so on until the program closes.

But ask yourself these questions. How can you determine:

- what variables are related to each other?
- what part of the code *owns* the variables?
- which functions can use the variables and which cannot?
- when the variable is no longer required?

Object-oriented programming helps answer these questions. Let's look at two ways it helps: data encapsulation and messaging.

# Features of object-oriented programming

## Data encapsulation

In object-oriented programming, **data encapsulation** allows us to collect related data into an object. Critically, we can also decide what information we want to expose to the rest of the program or even to the programmer.

Without objects, any variables that we declare are effectively available to any code in the same scope, including functions. This means that a variable's value may change at some point and, short of printing a statement every time any variable's value changes, we can't be entirely sure what variables have changed or what piece of code caused the change.

For instance, consider some variables for a program that keeps track of a student's details.

```python
student_name = ""
student_age = -1

def set_student_name():
    """Asks for a name, verifies that it is non-zero in length"""
    name = ""
    while len(name) == 0:
        name = input("Enter a name: ")
    student_name = name

def set_student_age():
    """Asks for an age, verifies that it is a valid integer"""
    age = -1
    while not age in range(11, 22):
        try:
            age = int(input("Enter an age: "))
        except:
            print("Please type a valid integer")
    student_age = age

def set_student_details():
    """Quickly sets student details"""
    student_name = input("Enter a name: ")
    student_age = input("Enter an age: ")
    # No validation!
```

Notice that we have two functions that validate the user's inputted name and age. However, there is also another function that performs no validation whatsoever.

Of course, we could just fix the code to perform proper validation. Even better, it could just call the previously-defined functions that do that for us.

However, that's still no guarantee that *other* code within the program won't have the issue as the ``set_student_details()`` function. It only takes a moment of absent-mindedness or perhaps working with another programmer unfamiliar with your validation techniques to cause bugs.

Instead, we can create a **class** (a sort of blueprint for an object) that contains the data. This will achieve two goals:

1. Encapsulate (enclose) the variables into a single structure so that we know ``student_name`` and ``student_age`` are related to each other.
2. Provide a guarantee that nothing other than approved functions can modify the data.

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass

@dataclass
class Student:
    """Object representing a student"""

    # Define the variables
    name: str
    age: age

    def set_name(self):
        """Asks for a name, verifies that it is non-zero in length"""
        new_name = ""
        while len(new_name) == 0:
            new_name = input("Enter a name: ")
        self.name = new_name

    def set_age(self):
        """Asks for an age, verifies that it is a valid integer"""
        new_age = -1
        while not new_age in range(11, 22):
            try:
                new_age = int(input("Enter an age: "))
            except:
                print("Please type a valid integer")
        self.age = new_age
```

With a class, we can be assured of the following:

1. ``Student``'s ``name`` and ``age`` are intrinsically related to each other: they both belong to the ``Student`` class
2. ``name`` and ``age`` should only be modified through ``set_name()`` and ``set_age()``

[^1]: Adapted from [Object-oriented programming](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-oriented_programming), Simple English Wikipedia (retrieved 15/11/2021, emphasis added).